Create new page about Parachains' Protocol Overview (#4122)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-parachains-protocol.md

---
id: learn-parachains-protocol
title: Parachains' Protocol Overview
sidebar_label: Protocol Overview
description: High level view of actors and protocols involved in running parachains on Polkadot.
keywords: [parachains, application-specific, sharding, protocol, validator, collator, nominator]
slug: ../learn-parachains-protocol
---

:::info

This page is a summary of the [Protocol Overview chapter in **The Polkadot Parachain Host Implementer's Guide**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot/book/protocol-overview.html)

:::

> The aim of the protocol is to carry a parachain's block from authoring to inclusion through a process that can be carried out repeatedly and in parallel for each parachain connected to the relay chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol aims to carry a parachain's block from authoring to inclusion through a process that can be carried out repeatedly and in parallel for each parachain connected to the relay chain.
```

## Main Actors

### Validators

> They are responsible for validating proposed parachain's blocks by checking the **Proof-of-Validity** (PoV) of the blocks and ensuring the PoV remains available. They have "skin in the game", meaning they have funds bonded on-chain that can be partially or fully confiscated in case of misbehavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are responsible for validating the proposed parachain's blocks by checking the **Proof-of-Validity** (PoV) of the blocks and ensuring the PoV remains available for a designated period. They have "skin in the game", meaning they have funds bonded on-chain that can be partially or fully confiscated by the network in case of misbehavior.
```

### Collators

They create the PoV that validators know how to check. Creating PoV requires familiarity with transaction format and block authoring rules of a specific parachain, as well as having access to its full state.

### Fishermen

> They catch misbehaving validators in exchange for a bounty. Collators and validators can behave as fishermen.

Reviewer: The fishermen component has been deprecated from the Polkadot architecture https://github.com/w3f/polkadot-wiki/issues/2396

https://github.com/w3f/polkadot-wiki/issues/2504

Author: right! Will delete this part. I believe the parity's doc was written some time ago.

> They catch misbehaving validators in exchange for a bounty. Collators and validators can behave as fishermen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Summary View

Reviewer: Keep the search engine optimization when naming sections and subsections.

```suggestion
## Parachains' Protocol Summary
```

The parachains' protocol can be summarized into three main steps:

1. Collators send to validators parachain blocks with their PoV for check.
2. Validators validate the block using the PoV, signing statements that can have positive or negative.
3. With enough positive statements the block can be added to the relay chain.

> The figure below shows a representation of a parachain with collators and validators. The figure also shows the journey of a block through the three main steps, as well as the sections where the [Inclusion Pipeline](#inclusion-pipeline) and the [Approval Process](#approval-process) take place (see next Sections).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parachains' protocol can be summarized into three main steps:

1. Collators send the parachain block (parablock) with PoV to the set for Validators assigned to the parachain.
2. Validators verify if the parablock follows the state transition rules of the parachain and sign statements that can have a positive or negative outcome.
3. With enough positive statements, the block is added to the relay chain.

The figure below shows a representation of a parachain with collators and validators. The figure also shows the journey of a block through the three main steps, as well as the sections where the [Inclusion Pipeline](#inclusion-pipeline) and the [Approval Process](#approval-process) take place (see following Sections).
```

> ![parachain-protocol-summary](../assets/parachain-protocol-summary.png)

Reviewer: Is this figure adapted from a different source? Typically, the chronological order of events is shown from left to right.

Author: I did the figures based on the description on the parity's doc. I noticed that the parachain is always shown from the right (attached to the relay chain on the right side). The idea was to keep the same location and zoom in to show the different processes (like in GIS/maps representations). That is why the figures here are from right to left. It is not clear the zoom part, I will change them a little to make the story clearer.

Reviewer: I see! That is the architecture figure, where the position of the components does not matter. What you are describing through your figures is a pipeline (chain of events), so left to right is more intuitive I think.

> ![parachain-protocol-summary](../assets/parachain-protocol-summary.png)

Reviewer: Some questions if I put myself in the shoes of a general Wiki reader

- Why is a parablock shown as a block with ?
- What is the difference between white and yellow tick marks (if they are positive and negative, then green and red colors would be a better choice).
- Can a validator sign multiple statements on the parablock or a single statement?

The gray shade can be a bit lighter.

Author: right, let me address this on Monday, I will review the figures and change the text accordingly

Author: - parablock with ? and white tick is a block that has been produced by a collator. The ? means that the block is not valid yet and the white tick is the PoV by the collator.

- the white tick is the PoV from the collator, the yellow tick are PoV from the para-validators

I can add a legend to explain the different symbols.

- as far as I know a validator can sign a single statement

Note that the network block contains multiple parablocks, I need to change this in the diagram.

I will provide an alternative diagram with lighter gray shade.

Let me know if this will answer your points :)

Reviewer: Makes sense. Add this info as the figure's description.

Author: Alright, the information has been added in the text with the new commits.

> Negative statements will lead to a dispute, and if there are false negatives whoever will be on the wrong side (once the dispute is resolved) will be slashed. False positives can also happen, those actors responsible for it will also be slashed and whoever reported the case will get a bounty. In order to detect false positives, PoV information must be available after the block has been added to the relay chain so that validators can check the work. PoVs are expected to be between 1 MB and 10 MB; as a consequence they are not included in blocks but they are part of the data availability scheme in which validators must prove that the inputs to their work will remain available.

Reviewer: Whenever possible, back the statements like these "PoVs are expected to be between 1 MB and 10 MB;" with references

Author: yeah, found this in the parity's doc with no ref, maybe should I mention the document?

Author: @DrW3RK thanks for the preliminary feedback, I will get back to this PR in late January when I am back. In the meantime, I implemented the Parachain Host Implementer Guide in the current pages of the wiki. I saw there is already a page about "Availability and Validity", I think this page can be merged together with the content in this page here and create a cohesive story about the lifecycle of a parachain block.

Reviewer: Yeah, sounds good to me!

> Negative statements will lead to a dispute, and if there are false negatives whoever will be on the wrong side (once the dispute is resolved) will be slashed. False positives can also happen, those actors responsible for it will also be slashed and whoever reported the case will get a bounty. In order to detect false positives, PoV information must be available after the block has been added to the relay chain so that validators can check the work. PoVs are expected to be between 1 MB and 10 MB; as a consequence they are not included in blocks but they are part of the data availability scheme in which validators must prove that the inputs to their work will remain available.

Reviewer: The bounty part is tied to Fishermen, which is deprecated.

```suggestion
Negative statements will lead to a dispute, and if there are false negatives, whoever will be on the wrong side (once the dispute is resolved) will be slashed. False positives can also happen; those actors responsible for it will also be slashed. To detect false positives, PoV information must be available after the block has been added to the relay chain so that validators can check the work. PoVs are typically between 1 MB and 10 MB in size and are not included in the relaychain blocks. However, as a part of the data availability scheme, they are made available on the network for a certain period so that the validators can perform the required checks.
```

![parachain-approval-process](../assets/parachain-approval-process.png)

:::info

More information can be found in the dedicated sections about the [approval process](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot/book/protocol-approval.html) and [disputes](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot/book/protocol-disputes.html). 

:::

## Network Asynchrony

We have mentioned how a relay chain block author must select the candidate and note it on the relay chain (we say the block is backed). The relay chain block author is selected by BABE, which is a forkful algorithm. This means that different block authors are chosen at the same time and they may not work on the same block parent (i.e. the representations in the previous figures are simplistic). Also, the sets of validators and parachains are not fixed, and the validators' assignments to parachains is also flexible. 

> We say that the network is **asynchronous** since there will be validators who gave received a block, and other validators who did not. Thus, the network is variable and it exists in multiple states. In the figure below (*left*) the Group 1 received block C while Group 2 did not due to network asynchrony. Validators in Group 2 can build another block on top of B, called C'. Assume that afterwards, some validators become aware of both C and C' while others remain aware of one of them (*right*). Validators in Group 3 must be aware of the network state in each head (C and C') and they may contribute to some or full extent on both. It is possible that due to network asynchrony two forks may grow in parallel for some time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We say that the network is **asynchronous** since there will be validators who have received a block, and other validators who did not. Thus, the network is variable and it exists in multiple states. In the figure below (*left*) the Group 1 received block C while Group 2 did not due to network asynchrony. Validators in Group 2 can build another block on top of B, called C'. Assume that afterwards, some validators become aware of both C and C' while others remain aware of one of them (*right*). Validators in Group 3 must be aware of the network state in each head (C and C') and they may contribute to some or full extent on both. It is possible that due to network asynchrony two forks may grow in parallel for some time.
```

4. The validators assigned to the parachain participate to the **Candidate Backing** subsystem.
   Candidates that gather enough signed validity statement are considered **"backable"** and their
   backing is the set of signed statements.
5. A relay chain block author (selected by [BABE][]) can note up to 1 backable candidate for each
   parachain to be included in the Relay Chain block alongside its backing. Once included in the
   Relay Chain the candidate is considered backable in the fork of the Relay Chain.
6. Once backable in the Relay Chain, the candidate is considered to be "pending availability", i.e.
   it is not considered to be part of the parachain until it is **proven available**.
7. In the following relay chain blocks, the validators will participate to the **Availability
   Distribution** subsystem to ensure availability of the candidate. That is, information regarding
   the availability of the candidate will be noted in the subsequent relay chain blocks.
8. Once the relay chain state machine has enough information to consider the candidate's PoV as
   being available, the candidate is considered to be part of the parachain and is graduated to

>    being a full parachain block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inclusion pipeline is the path of a parachain block (or parablock) from its creation to its
inclusion into the Relay Chain. The main checkpoints of that path are listed below.

1. Validators are assigned to parachains by the **Validator Assignment** routine.
2. A collator produces the parachain block (known as parachain candidate or candidate) along with
   PoV.
3. The collator forwards the candidate and PoV to validators assigned to the same parachain via the
   **Collator Distribution** subsystem.
4. The validators assigned to the parachain participate in the **Candidate Backing** subsystem.
   Candidates that gather enough signed validity statements are considered **"backable"** and their
   backing is the set of signed statements.
5. A relay chain block author (selected by [BABE](./learn-consensus.md#block-production-babe)) can note up to 1 backable candidate for each
   parachain to be included in the Relay Chain block alongside its backing. Once included in the
   Relay Chain the candidate is considered backable in that fork of the Relay Chain.
6. Once backable in the Relay Chain, the candidate is considered to be in "pending availability" status.
   It can only be considered a part of the parachain once it is **proven available**.
7. In the following relay chain blocks, the validators will participate in the **Availability
   Distribution** subsystem to ensure availability of the candidate. The subsequent relay chain blocks will note information regarding
      the candidate's availability.
8. Once the relay chain state machine has enough information to consider the candidate's PoV as
   being available, the candidate is considered part of the parachain and is graduated to
   being a full parachain block.
```

![parachain-inclusion-pipeline](../assets/parachain-inclusion-pipeline.png)

The figure above shows the path of a candidate block through the Inclusion pipeline. The block
changes its status through this path as follows:

- Candidate: A block is put forward by a collator to a validator (in this case V1). The candidate
  block is shown as white square with one white tick mark at the side (PoV from the collator). Note
  the candidate is not valid yet and can still fail to be included in the Relay Chain.

> - Seconded: The block is put forward by V1 to other validators (in this case V2 and V3). The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Seconded: The block is put forward by the validator V1 to other validators (in this case V2 and V3). The
```

  seconded block is shown as white square with a white tick mark and two yellow tick marks on top of
  it. The yellow marks show the PoV from the para-validators.
- Backable: The block validity is attested by a majority of the validators. The backable block is
  shown as white square with a white tick mark and three yellow tick marks on top of it. The yellow

>   marks show the PoV from the para-validators.

Reviewer: should this be "PoV statements from the para-validators"?

Author: right, specified in the text

- Included: The block is backed and considered available (we have a parablock). Parablocks are shown
  as square with white background and yellow border enclosing a "P".

Once the parablock is considered available and part of the parachain, it is still "pending
approval". The Inclusion Pipeline must conclude for a specific parachain before a new block can be
accepted on that parachain. After inclusion, the Approval Process starts, and it can run for many
parachain blocks at once.

The candidate can fail to be included in the parachain in any of the following ways:

- The collator is not able to propagate the block to any of the assigned validators.
- The candidate is not backed by validators participating to the Candidate Backing subsystem.
- The candidate is not selected by a relay chain block author.
- The candidate's PoV is not considered available within a timeout, and it is discarded from the
  Relay Chain.

## Approval Process

Once the parablock is considered available and part of the parachain, is still "pending approval".
At this stage the parablock is tentatively included in the parachain, although more confirmation is

> necessary. In fact, the validators in the parachain (i.e. the parachain validators) are sampled from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
necessary. In fact, the validators assigned to the parachain (i.e. the parachain validators) are sampled from
```

a validator set which is assumed to be 1/3 dishonest. This means that there is a chance to randomly
sample parachain validators for a parachain that are majority or fully dishonest and can back a
candidate wrongly. The **Approval Process** allows to detect misbehavior after-the-fact without
allocating more validators that would ultimately reduce the throughput of the system. Because after
being considered available a parablock will accept children blocks, failure to pass the approval
process will invalidate the parablock and its descendants. Only the validators who backed the block

> in question will be slashed, not the validators who backed the descendants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a validator set which is assumed to be 1/3 dishonest in the worst-case scenario. In this case, it is likely that the majority of the random para-validators sampled for a specific parachain are dishonest and can back a candidate wrongly.  To address this, the **Approval Process** allows detecting misbehavior after-the-fact without
allocating more para-validators, which would ultimately reduce the system's throughput. As a parablock can accept children blocks after being considered available, failure to pass the approval
process will invalidate the parablock as well as its descendants (children blocks). Only the validators who backed the block
in question will be slashed, not those who backed the descendants.
```

The approval pipeline can be divided into the following steps:

1. Parablocks that have been included by the Inclusion Pipeline are pending approval for a time
   window known as the **secondary checking window**.
2. During the secondary checking window, validators (secondary checkers) randomly self-select to

>    perform secondary checks on the parablock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   perform secondary checks on each of the parablock.
```

3. Secondary checkers acquire the parablock with PoV and re-run the validation function.
4. Secondary checkers gossip the results of their checks. Contradictory results lead to escalation
   in which all validators are required to check the block. The validators on the losing side will
   be slashed.
5. At the end of the process the parablock is either approved or rejected.

The figure below shows the path of a parachain block when it exits the Inclusion Pipeline and it
enters the Approval Process. The parablock becomes accepted when it is backed, available and
**undisputed**. Thr parablock is checked a second time by a subset of validators (V5, V6 and V7),
and if there are no contradictory results the block is approved and gossiped to other relay chain

> validators. Note the parablock after second checks is shown as a square with white background a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validators. Note the parablock after secondary checks is shown as a square with white background a
```

> yellow border enclosing a "P", and three white ticks (one for each second checker). Approved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
yellow border enclosing a "P", and three white ticks (one for each secondary check). Approved
```

> para-blocks are shown as yellow squares the become grey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
para-blocks are shown as yellow squares that become grey in color.
```

Chain (we say the block is backed). The relay chain block author is selected by BABE, which is a
forkful algorithm. This means that different block authors are chosen at the same time and they may
not work on the same block parent (i.e. the representations in the previous figures are simplistic).
Also, the sets of validators and parachains are not fixed, and the validators' assignments to
parachains is also flexible.

We say that the network is **asynchronous** since there will be validators who have received a
block, and other validators who did not. Thus, the network is variable and it exists in multiple
states. In the figure below (_left_) the Group 1 received block C while Group 2 did not due to
network asynchrony. Validators in Group 2 can build another block on top of B, called C'. Assume
that afterwards, some validators become aware of both C and C' while others remain aware of one of
them (_right_). Validators in Group 3 must be aware of the network state in each head (C and C') and
they may contribute to some or full extent on both. It is possible that due to network asynchrony

> two forks may grow in parallel for some time.

Reviewer: This section needs a conclusion. Something in the lines of "two/multiple forks may grow in parallel for some time, but eventually......"

Author: right, added
